PROJECT REPORT: Carbon Emission from car Calculator

Student Name: SOHAM SUDARSHAN SHINDE 
Registration No: 25BCE10463
Course:Python Essentials.

1. Introduction
-In the modern world, climate change is one of the most dangerous factors, with the transportation sector being a significant contributor to global greenhouse gas emissions. While many individuals desire to be eco friendly, they often dont have the tools to quantify and get their carbon emission values.

-The Carbon Emission from Car Calculator is a Python based program created by me to overcome this gap. It allows users to estimate the Carbon Dioxide (CO2) emissions of their vehicle based on fuel type, distance, and fuel efficiency. This project applies fundamental programming concepts such as modular design, mathematical modeling, and input validation to solve a real-world environmental problem.


2. Problem Statement
-Many drivers are unaware of the specific environmental cost of their daily travels. Without accessible data, it is difficult to act on changes such as switching to public transport. Existing tools are often web-based thus, they require internet access. There is a need for an offline, and immediate command line tool that can calculate emissions accurately based on specific vehicle parameters (Petrol vs. Diesel) and provide instant feedback to the user.


3. Functional Requirements
-The system implements the following core functions:

>Fuel Selection: The system takes user input to select between Petrol and Diesel engines.

>Data Processing: The system takes numerical input for "Distance Traveled" (in km) and "Fuel Efficiency" (in km/L).

>Emission Calculation: The system calculates the total fuel consumed and multiplies it by the specific stoichiometric emission factor which are stored in a configuration module.

>Eco-Feedback: The system analyzes the result and categorizes it (e.g., "High Emission" or "Eco-Friendly"), displaying a relevant advisory message at the end on output.

>Error Handling: The system can detect invalid inputs such as text instead of numbers and provides clear error messages without crashing.


4. Non-functional Requirements
>Usability: The application utilizes a clean Command Line Interface  with clear prompts and separators, making it easy for non-technical users to navigate.

>Maintainability: The project follows a Modular structures which is split into 3 separate files making it easy to update emission factors or logic without breaking the entire code.

>Reliability: The system uses defensive programming (try-except blocks) to ensure it handles unexpected user behavior gracefully.

>Accuracy: The system uses standard emission factors (2.31 kg/L for Petrol, 2.68 kg/L for Diesel) derived from environmental standards to ensure realistic estimates.


5. System Architecture
-The project follows a modular design pattern, splitting the functionality into three distinct Python modules to ensure maintainability and separation of logic.

-Directory Structure:

>src/main.py (main): The entry point of the application. It usually handles user interaction, calls functions from other modules, and displays the final results.

>src/formulas.py (formulas): Contains the core mathematical formulas for calculating carbon emissions based on distance and mileage.

>src/fueltype.py (inputs as petrol types): Manages fuel-specific data, including the selection logic and storage of emission factors (2.31 for Petrol, 2.68 for Diesel).


6.Component Diagram
-The system is composed of three interacting components:

>User Interface (main.py): gets inputs (Distance, Mileage) and presents outputs.

>Calculation (formulas.py): Processes numerical data to compute the final emission value.

>Data (fueltype.py): Provides the specific stoichiometric constants required for the calculation.


7. Design Decisions & Rationale
Why Python? 
->Python was selected for its simplicity and robust handling of mathematical operations.
Why 3 Modules?
->I chose to split the code into main.py, formulas.py, and fueltype.py. This decision separates the User Interface from the Math Logic and the Fuel Data. If emission rates change in the future only fueltype.py needs to be updated without risking bugs in the main calculation logic.

Input Validation: implemented within the main module to ensure that invalid data it does not crash the mathematical functions in formulas.py


8.Implementation Details
-The application logic is distributed as follows:
>fueltype.py: It Defines the get_emission_factor function, which maps user selection ("1" or "2") to the correct float value (e.g., 2.31).
>formulas.py: It Defines the compute_carbon_emission function. It implements the formula:
>Total Emission = (Distance / Mileage) * Emission Factor
>main.py: Uses a try-except block to catch ValueError during input and orchestrates the flow between the other two modules.

Code Example from formulas.py:
def compute_carbon_emission(distance, mileage, factor):
    if mileage <= 0:
        return 0.0
    return round((distance / mileage) * factor, 2)
